==========================
Install and launch OpenCOR
==========================

Download OpenCOR from `www.opencor.ws <http://www.opencor.ws>`__.
Versions are available for Windows, Mac and Linux. Note that the
annotation section of this tutorial relies on the OpenCOR snapshot
2015-06-09 (or later). Create a shortcut to the executable (found in the
bin directory) on your desktop and click on this to launch OpenCOR. A
window will appear that looks like Figure 1(a).

|image0| |image1|

(a) (b)

**Figure 1**. (a) Default positioning of dockable windows. (b) An
alternative configuration achieved by dragging and dropping the dockable
windows.

The central area is used to interact with files. By default, no files
are open, hence the OpenCOR logo is shown instead. To the sides, there
are dockable windows, which provide additional features. Those windows
can be dragged and dropped to the top or bottom of the central area as
shown in Figure 1(b) or they can be individually undocked or closed. All
closed panels can be re-displayed by enabling them in the *View* menu,
or by using the *Tools* menu *Reset All* option. Clicking on
‘CTRL’ [12]_ & ‘spacebar’ on the Windows version, removes (for less
clutter) or restores these two side panels.

Any of the subpanels (*Physiome Model Repository*, *File Browser*, and
*File Organiser*) can be closed with the top right delete button, and
then restored from the *View* .. *Windows*.. menu. Files can be dragged
and dropped into the File Organiser to create a local directory
structure for your files.

|image2|\ OpenCOR has a plugin architecture and can be used with or
without a range of modules. These can be viewed under the *Tools* menu.
By default they are all included, as shown in Figure 2. Information
about developing plugins for OpenCOR is also available [13]_.

